VIII Congreso Colegio 
de Médicos de Irapuato
Colegio de Médicos de Irapuato (CMIAC), or Irapuato’s Medical Association, was established in 1970 with the express purpose of promoting life long learning and continuous training of local healthcare professionals. CMIAC was registered in 2009 with “Secretaria de Profesiones del Estado de Guanajuato”, the Government body overseeing industry trade groups. Three years later, in 2012, CMIAC organised its first regional conference.

Titled “Congreso Regional para Médicos Familiares y Generales”, the conference was backed by Universidad de Guanajuato and the Asociación Latinoamericana de Diabetes, or Latin American Diabetes Association, and granted credited hours towards medical recertification for the attendees. Later came the “Jornadas de Actualización Médica”, a weekly conference cicle that also granted credited hours.

Year 2020 promised a lot, for it was CMIAC’s 50th anniversary. They planned a gala to honour past members; a ball on the night of September 28; anniversary rings and conmemorativa plaques were made. And it was all supposed to be held during the VIII Edition of their Annual Conference. However, this was not meant to be, as the Global Coronavirus Pandemic dismantled their plans, casting a long shadow over CMIAC’s future.

The Lockdown, the looming recession, and layoffs halted CMIAC’s main sources of income: membership dues, Government Grants, and Medical Laboratories Sponsorships. The Annual Conference had never turned in a profit, and it was by far the biggest expense in the budget, so the Office of the President of CMIAC decided that the 8th Annual Conference and the 50th Anniversary celebrations would be postponed.

This is where we came in. During our initial approach and research we looked for alternatives to host the celebrations, fund the Annual Conference, and turn in a profit. During our first talks, Big Pharma did not express interest in sponsoring a digital conference as they did not see any potential in it.

So we came up with our “Oyster Fork” Strategy. Our main tine would be the professionalisation of CMIAC’s Brand; our second tine would be the creation of a M2M platform capable of producing, hosting, and transmitting the Congress and adjacent celebrations; the third tine would be the set of strategies, campaigns, and actions that would allow us to capitalise the new platform and brand. Our “Oyster Fork” allowed us to rescue the Conference, host the Anniversary Celebrations, turn in a profit, and secure sponsorships and alliances for the years to come.

The third and most important tine was the set of strategies we developed to maximise the
return of investment, liquidity and a consistent cash flow. We developed “advertisement
packages” that were tailored to both Big Pharma Labs, bound by regulatory compliance, and small local Labs. We negotiated deals with the previously uninterested Labs, including Pfizer, Lilly, GlaxoSmithKline, Schwabe, and Bayer. We tailored the packages in order to comply with national advertisement regulations, included video advertisements that related to the talks in progress, and worked closely with the Lab’s marketing departments to properly use our captive audience.

Our strategy allowed the project to reach profitability during the research phase, and obtain a 500% return on total investment. For the first time the Annual Conference turned in a profit, all while creating new long term cash flow sources and forging strategic alliances with Big Pharma.

VIII Congreso
The identity System of the Annual Conference was designed around a digital painting
commissioned by our Design Bureau. The painting tied together emblematic parts of Irapuato, the host city, with references to the relevant medical specialties, and the Rod of Asclepius. The main elements of the painting, which included a painstaking recreation of a famous local mural, made their way to conference diplomas. The diplomas were certified by the University of Guanajuato, and we received very positive feedback on the design.
Our strategies and their implementations made the “VIII Congreso Regional para Médicos
Generales y Familiares” a runaway success. We beat internal attendance records and, most importantly, we were able to hold the Conference and the 50th Anniversary Celebration during a record setting dumpster fire of a year.

Now, with their gaze firmly into the future, Colegio de Médicos de Irapuato, A.C., has new
income streams, more tools to achieve its objectives, and is currently exploring turning their Annual Conference from a Regional event into a National or, perhaps, International Conference. Having seized opportunities and turned adversity into success.

